The War of the Five Kings was a military conflict that broke out after the death of King Robert Baratheon. The war was essentially a struggle between three claimants to the Iron Throne, which was waged in parallel with two independence movements. The five kings in question were Robert's heir Joffrey Baratheon, Robert's younger brothers Stannis and Renly Baratheon, the King in the North Robb Stark, and the King of the Iron Islands Balon Greyjoy. The conflict was orchestrated by Petyr Baelish, the Master of Coin, with the help of Lysa Arryn, who poisoned her husband Jon Arryn, Robert Baratheon's Hand of the King, and sent a letter to her sister Catelyn Stark, claiming that the Lannisters had poisoned her husband. Petyr, of the small House Baelish, started the war to gain more power and influence for himself.

After Robert's death, the Iron Throne is taken by his rightful heir, Joffrey. However, the discovery that he and his brother and sister are bastards, born of incest between Queen Consort Cersei and her twin brother Jaime, forces Stannis and Renly to lay claim to the throne. Stannis believes himself to be the rightful heir by right of blood, being Robert's heir after Joffrey, Myrcella, and Tommen are excluded from the line of succession because they were bastards born of incest. Renly claims the throne on the grounds that he would make a better king than Stannis, even though he is second in the rightful line of succession to Stannis.

Meanwhile, Robb Stark, Lord of Winterfall, is proclaimed King in the North by his bannermen after Joffrey executes his father on false charges of treason. Robb led an army south to free his then-captive father and repel a Lannister attack on the riverlands. As King in the North, Robb declares the North and the riverlands, ruled by his maternal grandfather Hoster Tully, to be a sovereign kingdom of the North, no longer subject to the Iron Throne.

With the attention of the North and the Iron Throne distracted, Balon Greyjoy, Lord Reaper of Pyke and ruler of the Iron Islands, takes the opportunity to reclaim the Iron Islands as independent. He proclaims himself King of the Iron Islands and begins raiding the North while most of the Northern armies are busy fighting the Lannisters in the riverlands and westerlands south of the Neck.

By 303 AC, All five kings either died or were killed in battle, bringing the War of the Five Kings to a complete and final end. Many of the events Littlefinger had initiated to increase his power and influence were eventually exposed by the surviving members of House Stark and used as evidence, leading to his execution, marking the official end of the War of the Five Kings.